---
title: 'Working with services of the Internet'
date: 2012-08-14
permalink: /posts/2015/06/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - Internet
  - WWW
  - FTP
  -Telnet
  -Gopher
  -SFTP
---
Introduction
======
The Internet plays quite an invaluable role in this knowledge age since it is the cornerstone of every day-to-day information acquisition and sharing means. The Internet plays a pivotal role ranging from publishing Personal Home Pages to WhatsApping. The Internet provides an array of services that are exposed at the application layer which are user-supported.
Hyper Text Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is the service that is generating the highest traffic over the Internet because of its apparent ease of use and general acceptance among users. HTTP provides web contents (hypermedia i.e., texts, graphics, audio and video) in the form of WebPages which are authored by designers. The WWW has, not surprisingly, been the most colossal library (digital) for knowledge in the history of civilization. Different technologies have phased the Web into different generations, with HTML (Hyper Text Markup Language) the underpinning technology for its thriving success.
File Transfer, Access and Management (FTAM) is another service available over the Net; this provides directory and file access. File Transfer Protocol (FTP) is the underlying protocol for this service. FTP exploits the Internet to provide normal File System Management routines over the Internet (i.e., copy, cut, delete, paste and other operations) between End Systems over the Internet. FTP is used to transfer large contents between nodes over the Internet; a classic illustration is a transfer of a database from a workstation to a remote database server for hosting purpose and/ or collaboration among developers.
FTP comes in has many implementations namely: TFTP (Trivial FTP), this performs only simple operations, with no authentication and is rarely used in interactive environments (Wikipedia, 2014). It is generally used for automated transfer of configuration or boot files between machines in a local environment (Wikipedia, 2014). SFTP (Secured FTP) is a more secured version of FTP that uses SSH (Secure Shell) protocol to encrypt messages between communicating parties. A secure Shell is a protocol that establishes a secure communication session for the delivery of packets over a TCP/IP connection.SSH is the underlying protocol that provides security in SFTP.SFTP is essentially FTP over a SSH, hence provide the same level of security as SSH(Heimstra, 2007).
Mailing has also become an indispensable feature of the Internet; through mailing services the Internet provides a stack of protocols at the Application Layer which include POP (Post Office Protocol) to retrieve stored messages from POP Servers. The Post Office Protocol (POP) servers store incoming mails (Bagad & Dhotre, 2003). Simple Mail transfer Protocol (SMTP) servers handle forwarding of mails in a Mail Exchange system. IMAP (Internet Mail Access Protocol) is the newer protocol that provides stability, functionality and security for the retrieval of stored mails. Post Office Protocol, version 3 (POP3) is simple and limited in functionality (Forouzan, 2007).A great many mail agents are available out there, some are freeware, shareware and others are proprietary embedded in applications.
In addition to these services, Telnet (Terminal Emulation) is a service that provides remote logons over the Internet to End Systems. It allows a user to connect to a remote host (Gorth & Skandier, 2005). Terminal Network (Telnet) provides remote login capability, which enables a user at a terminal or a personal computer to logon to a remote computer and function as if directly connected to that computer. (Stallings, 2002).
The Internet also provides streaming services of audio/video contents which have marked as framework of the Web 2.0. Streaming of stored, live, and interactive media contents have come to fruition with the development of technologies that can implement these services over the Internet. Webcasting, Internet telephony, Internet radios and other services are increasingly being developed.
In this chapter, we are going to walk through these enumerated services and others that are being used over the Internet. We shall only discuss client programs (agents) that run these services; the functionality of the server programs is decidedly beyond the scope of this post.


 File Transfer Protocol (SFTP, TFTP, SSH)
======
FTP stands for File Transfer Protocol and allows you to transfer file(s) from one computer to another in a sophisticated manner (CO.LTD, 1997). FTP client programs provide access to files and directories stored of FTP servers on the Internet. FTP is built on client-server architecture and uses a separate control and data connections between the client and the server (Wikipedia, 2014). FTP utilities use clear-text username and password authentication mechanism. 
FTP stands for the client programs and the protocol that supports file transfer between nodes on a TCP/IP based network.  FTP client programs come in Command-Line Interface versions and Graphical User Interface versions. CLI FTP programs were the first to emerge as earlier Operating Systems Text-based Command-Line Interfaces. Virtually, all platforms support the UNIX-Like console FTP utility to manage the operations of file transfer between a client and a server in an IP network.
 The specifications of FTP were originally stated in RFC (Request Form Comment) 114 on 16 April 1971 by Abhay Bhushan. The specifications of the functionalities of FTP have been revised in a series of RFCs. FTP is supported by both IPv4 and IPv6 networks and is exclusively based on Unicast IPs. In this section, we are going to discuss popular client FTP programs that are available on the Internet some of which are free-of-cost and others are priced.  
The most common FTP client software available on the Net are: Filezilla, which is a GUI based program that is used to logon to FTP sites to access directories and files. Files can be in the form of ASCII (American Standard Code for Information Interchange) text-files and/ or binary files. Filezilla is a common client program that can be downloaded from a range of websites freely. Figure 1.0 shows the interface of Filezilla that has established a session between a remote server and a local machine.

Filezilla is a free, cross-platform application that provides File System Manipulation facilities using TCP connect at port 20. Binary files are available for Windows, Linux and Mac OSX. It supports FTP, SFT and FTPS (FTP over SSL/TSL) TCP connections (Wikipedia, 2014).

The features of Filezilla include:
------
* Transfer of files in FTP, SFTP and encrypted FTPS.
* Support IPv6 addressing scheme on the Internet.
* Multilingual package that is available on over forty languages among which include Arabic, German, French, English, Chinese, Japanese and many more.
* Supports pause and resume of file transfer sessions
* It is a multithreaded application
* It provides bookmarking of favourite site for quick access in the long run.
* It is a highly customizable application that has seed limits set capability.
* Remote file editing
* Provides a persistent connection session.
* Server side searching ability

Downsides of Filezilla are as follows:
------
* Filezilla stores usernames and password as plain-texts such serve as a potential source for malicious exploit. These files can be accessed by malicious programs to provide headway for intruders to gain access to the user’s account on the server and to damage resources on the system.

Another popular client FTP program is FTP Voyager which also basically provides the integral functionalities of an FTP client program which have been stated earlier. FTP Voyager began as an ActiveX project by Mark Peterson as “FTPFree” (Wikipedia, 2014).  FTP Voyager version 16 supportsIPv6, 64-bit and more functionality.  Figure 2.0 shows the window of FTP Voyager client package.

Feature of FTP Voyager:
* FTP/FTPS/SFTP protocols
* Directory Synchronization (i.e. synchronization of local and remote directories)
* Multithreading of processes
* Server side file searching and indexing
* Support for proxy server.
* Customizable UI
* Real-time File editing
FTP Voyager includes a component called FTP Voyager Scheduler which allows for various actions to be scheduled:
* Uploads
* Downloads
* Synchronizations (Local/Remote)
* File move operation (move up, move down)
* External batch operations

FTP sites can also be accessed at the command-line interface which virtually all platforms support. To access an FTP site at the MS-DOS prompt, you have to first know the FTP URL (e.g., voyager.deanza.tbda.edu) and an account at the site which usually is created by the Administrator of the server. You must also have privileges to the resources on the site; roles and privileges are assigned by Administrators. 

To access an FTP site in DOS, follow the following steps:
* Open the Run Prompt and type CMD			
* Click Ok which fires up the CMD console.
* At the prompt, type FTP as indicated next.
* To perform the necessary file and directory operations, like get (to download a file from the server), mget  to download multiple files which can also be used with a wildcard like \*.txt to download multiple files that are text files in the present directory, put is the command to upload a file and as you may guess, mput is the command to upload multiple files which can also use wildcard. Lest we forget, the encoding scheme should be set to ASCII or binary to avoid data corruption. 
* To perform more operations, type help at the FTP console to see the available commands as shown

* Anonymous login facility is provided by default on most FTP servers which provide access to files and directories available in the public domain. To access these files, a user does not need to have an account or password; instead, the user can use anonymous as the user name and guest as the password (Forouzan, 2007). And in other cases, the username can be anonymous and password is the user’s e-mail address.

Birth of the World Wide Web
======
The web is a pretty recent feature (Electronic mail is an example of an application that pre-dates the Web) of the Internet that has radically changed the way we communicate and perceive information. Researchers at CERN (European Organization for Nuclear Research) were the vanguards for the creation of the World Wide Web — which is a global hypermedia system of information storage and retrieval. 
The WWW project was originally developed to provide a distributed hypermedia system which could easily access – from any desktop computer -- information spread across the world (Gromov, 2012). The web includes standard formats for text, graphics, sound, and video which can be indexed easily and searched by all networked machines. Using NeXT's object-oriented technology, the first Web server and client machines were built by CERN -- the European Laboratory for Particle Physics in November 1990. Since then the Web has truly encompassed the globe and access has proliferated across all computer platforms in both the corporate and home markets.
Internet Explorer is also a doorway to FTP sites. It can be used similarly to WWW sites but with small modification by going to View Menu and choosing Open FTP site in Windows Explorer as shown below:
In view of the fact that users like GUI based programs, people seldom use DOS based FTP; it is exclusively used by system administrators to transfer huge files in an IP network.

MAILING SERVICE (SMTP, POPV3, IMAP)
======
Communication has been part of human civilization; the passing of message from person-to-person and among communities has been a herculean task with the increment of distance. Communication and distance have been inversely related before the advent of the mass media. People used to pass on messages through couriers who will take considerable time to deliver these messages. These messages are also known as snail mails. Postal systems immerged as aid to these bottlenecks by batching mails that belong to the same class for delivery to a particular location. The delivery of these mails took different media (transportation) but the result is work being done and on time. 
With the advent of the New Media, the face of communication has dramatically changed, which has led to the phenomenon of a global village where messages can be delivered from one point of the globe to another in just a few seconds if not minutes. The New Media has unique advantages that are summarized by Crosbie  (2002) as follows:
The hallmark characteristics of this New Medium are: 
 * That individualized messages can simultaneously be delivered to an infinite number of people.  
 * And that each of the people involved shares reciprocal control over that content.
Mailing service is a subset of the vehicles of the New Media; there are plenty of mail servers out there that provide mailing services to clients some of which are costless and others are organization-specific. The way electronic mail works on the Internet is similar to the way the postal system works. E-mail is a blend for Electronic Mail which literally, is an automated version of postal system with the bottlenecks of slow delivery removed and improvement on security and reliability. Email is much older than ARPANet or the Internet (Peter, 2001). At the beginning of the Internet era, the messages sent by electronic mail were short and consisted of text only; they let people exchange quick memos. Today, electronic mail is much more complex. It allows a message to include text, audio, and video. It also allows one message to be sent to one or more recipients (Forouzan, 2007). Early mails were only text-supported; Multi-purpose Internet Mail Extension (MIME) is a supplement that has been developed to support non-ASCII formats in a mailing system. Almost all mail exchangers support MIME that can augment the power of SMTP. Some of these supports are: audio, graphic, video, applications and others.
User Agents are client programs in a mailing system that act as the interface with the mail server and the user (or calling program). The following listings are the tasks of a User Agent:
* Composition of  new messages
* Reading of messages
* Reply to messages
* Forwarding messages
* Handling of mailbox

These tasks and other accessories are provided by user Agents on behalf of the user or calling program.
* Command-Driven
* Graphical User Interface (which are event driven)
Command-Driven Agents were the earliest and are now obsolete. But they are still found in server environments where they are used by Administrators. They are apparently text-based console applications. For example, a user can type the character r, at the command prompt, to reply to the sender of the message, or type the character R to reply to the sender and all recipients. Some examples of command-driven user agents are mail, pine, and elm.
GUI-based Mail Agents are relatively modern and are event driven (e.g., UIs with icons to respond handle user events like click, keystrokes and others). They are pretty popular among consumers in the market.  Some examples of GUI-based user agents are Eudora, Outlook, and Netscape (Forouzan, 2007).
Notwithstanding, there are provisions for web-based access to emails in the form of HTML. Web-based access to mailboxes is becoming a commonplace for most users. The idea is somewhat simple; a user makes a request to a mail server through a HTTP request and the server in turn replies with a form which contains space for user_id  (i.e., email address) and password. These credentials are matched with the stored authentication file to provide access to the user’s account in the form of plain an HTML page format. The forwarding of a message is fundamentally done by SMTP server. 

Introduction to mailing with Outlook Express:
------
Microsoft Outlook Express is a product-line User Agent that Provides access to ones mail account. Outlook comes as part of the Office Suite. It is quite a robust Agent that provides access to POP, SMTP, IMAP servers. The figure below depicts the window of a mail being composed in Outlook including an attachment.
As we mention earlier, web-based access is also possible a browser. The following screenshot show an account creation form for Hotmail. 
In this form the user is required to provide the necessary information to have an account with Hotmail, which is just one of the mail service providers out there. Others include Gmail, Yahoo and private organizations. 
The syntax of an email is as follows

| Username | @mail_server_name | .domain |
| :---         |     :---      |          :--- |
| The username can be any valid unique identifier for that user e.g., Fatmata   | @ is just a directive that signal a computer name is next e.g., @yahoo, @universityofmakeni e.t.c.     | 
The period precedes the domain, the Internet nodes are identified by a hierarchical namespacing with dot (.) at the root domain followed by Top Level Domains (TLDs). These TLD are virtually three-character identifies like .edu, .mil, .org, .com, .net and emerging domains like .biz, .info. IANA (Internet Assigned Numbers Authority) is responsible for these names and numbers in the Internet.    |


History of Hypertext
======


Conclusion
======


References
======
Bagad, V. S., & Dhotre, I. A. (2003). Computer Networks (1 ed.). Shaniwan Peth, India.
CO.LTD, S. C. (1997, March 3). E-mail: connecting people across the Globe. United States: SULTAN CHAND & CO. LTD.
Crosbie, V. (2002). What is the New Media. 
Forouzan, B. A. (2007). data Communication and Networking. New York: Mc-Graw Hill.
Gorth, D., & Skandier, T. (2005). Network Study Guide (2 ed.). San Francisco, United States: Sybex.
Gromov, G. (2012). History of Internet and World Wide Web - Roads and Crossroads of the Internet History. NetValley Online Writings.