---
title: 'Dynamical Systems Modelling: Part I'
date: 2021-10-17
permalink: /posts/2021/10/blog-post-1/
author: Yusuf Brima
author_profile: true
tags:
  - DE
  - ODE
  - PDE
  - Dynamical Systems
  - Physical Systems
---
<p class="page__date"><strong>
  <i class="fa fa-fw fa-users" aria-hidden="true"></i> Authors:</strong>
  Denis Mulumba and Yusuf Brima
</p>

Introduction to physical/dynamical process modelling
======
<p style="text-align:justify;">
In our day to day lives, a lot of natural and artificial phenomena can be described and/ or explained using Mathematical tools. Many of these phenomena change with time, some in  a more sophisticated way compared to others. This inspires the modelling of such systems termed to as Dynamical Systems. Dynamical Systems can range from simple interaction of predators and preys in a habitat, for example the variation of the population of foxes and rabbits, to viral spread (such as COVID-19) in a population. The set of mathematical tools used to model such systems allow us, we mean, any one with a fair bit of motivation and access of a modern computer programming environment, to model and make meaningful predictions of the time-evolving properties if such systems. That's why, modelling techniques of dynamical systems are extensively used in engineering, economics, epidemiology, physics  and many more disciplines.
</p>
<p style="text-align:justify;">
However, the factors and variables determine the cumbersomeness of the dynamical system under consideration. These systems behavior can be interpreted to the re-known differential equations from which further examinations can be done to well explain how these systems behave.
</p>

Differential Equations (Ordinary and Partial
======
<p style="text-align:justify;">
 If you are a numbers nerd or have an inclination to mathematics, odds are, you may have come across this linchpin of modern mathematics. If not, be rest assured, because you are about to learn something profound which will change your view of the world around you. If you are wondering, we are not exaggerating! Thus, in this blog, we want to journey with you into the amazing beauty and power of this approach to model time-varying systems. So, what is a differential equation? A differential equation (often abbreviated DE) can be defined as an equation that contains one or more functions of one independent variable and their corresponding derivatives. So, if you are acquainted with functions and and high school calculus (i.e., differential and integral), we are in a better footing if not, don't worry. Learn the basics of <a href = "https://www.mathsisfun.com/sets/function.html"> functions </a>  and <a href="https://www.mathsisfun.com/calculus/derivatives-introduction.html"> derivatives </a> and come back and continue. Differential equations range from ordinary to partial. The generic form of a differential equation is thus:
</p>

$$
\begin{equation}
     \frac{d \mathbf{x}}{d t}=f(\mathbf{x}), \mathbf{x} \in \mathbb{R}^{d},
     \label{eq:differential_equation}
 \end{equation}
$$

with initial value $\mathbf{x}\left(t_{0}\right)=\mathbf{x}_{0}$. As mentioned above, ordinary differential equation (ODE) is one of types of DEs. It is called ordinary because it entails a $\textbf{single independent variable}$ like $\textbf{x}$ in equation $\ref{eq:ode_sample}$.

$$
\begin{equation}
    \frac{dy}{dx}=f(x).
    \label{eq:ode_sample}
\end{equation}
$$

<p style="text-align:justify;">
An ODE does not impose the relationship between partial derivatives of a multivariate function % what is a multivariate function?
as it is for a partial differential equation (PDE). One may wonder, what is a multivariate function anyway?! A multivariate (otherwise known as multivariable) function is just a fancy name for a function that has multiple inputs: if you are a programmer, think of it a a function with multiple arguments/parameters and multiple return values (they could not necessarily be of the same type). That's it, you get the idea. A mathematical national representation is shown in equation $\ref{multi}$. In contrast, a function with single input  and a single output is called a single-variable function. Think of, for example a black-box, which you enter in and our height (in meters for example) comes out on the other side as shown in equation $\ref{single}$.
</p>

$$
\begin{equation}
     f: \mathbb{R}^{n} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^{m}.
     \label{multi}
 \end{equation}
$$

As example of a multivariate function is shown as follows:

$$
 \[
    f(x, y)=x^{3}-y^{3}+3 x y+7,
 \]
$$

 which is a function of two independent variables $x$ and $y$.

$$
\begin{equation}
     f: \mathbb{R} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}.
     \label{single}
 \end{equation}
 $$

 An example of a single variable function can be as follows:

 $$
  \[
    f(x)=x^{2} + 2,
 \]
 $$

<p style="text-align:justify;">
 where the function has $x$ only as the independent variable. The example of a single variable function above is a stated oversimplification, because in reality, it could be linear, non-linear, cubic, quadratic or polynomial in form. However, that is the basis of all ODE formulations. It has one independent variable and it's derivatives.
 So you may be wondering, are there nuts and bolts about ODEs worth pointing out. You definitely guessed it! There are, in fact a slew of of technical details to which becomes are whole area of specialization in the study of differential equations. So, to be just to the field, we shall brush through the main (we mean what we deem to the bare essentials) ideas. To home these ideas, let's take a some example of an ODE:
</p>

 $$
 \[
 y+\frac{d y}{d x}=5 x,
 \]
 $$

<p style="text-align:justify;">
the equation about is a function of $y$ with respect to (w.r.t for short in mathematical speak) the variable $x$ and it's derivative $\frac{d y}{d x}$. The derivative is the key to it been called a differential equation as shown above. So pay a closer attention to this piece of fact as we proceed and that's what make this mathematical form of abstraction very powerful. The $y$ is called a function, because in maths, a dependent variable is function of its input(s) plus any other constant(s). You may be wondering why on earth we are ranting about the power (and beauty) of these mathematical artifacts. The reason is simple! In our universe (and maybe others beyond our current scientific knowledge), things change, and to be able to describe this change is what led our 17$\textsuperscript{th}$ Century ancestors: Leibniz, the Bernoulli brothers and others to conjure the ideas of differential equations.
</p>
<p style="text-align:justify;">
To deeply appreciate the usefulness of DEs, let's talk about rabbits albeit in math terms. The intuition about the evolutionary behaviour of rabbit population in a suitable habitat is pretty straightforward -- at least if you have some environmental priors, which is not rocket science. Put bluntly, the more rabbits we have the baby rabbits then can be over time. There is an inherent feedback loop effect because those baby rabbits will grow and have more babies too. The cycle continues as the population grows faster and faster until some limit (physical as you would imagine) is reached. So to put this into a mathematical framework would be as follows:
at any given time $t$, we will have $N$ rabbits with a growth rate $r$. Therefore, the population's rate of change is:
</p>

$$
\begin{equation}
    \frac{dN}{dt}
    \label{rabbits}
\end{equation}
$$

<p style="text-align:justify;">
If you have some fair bit of calculus under your belt, then it will become apparent equation \ref{rabbits} is a derivative (or slope as some would call it). It means $\lim\limits_{t \to +\infty}$, we want to capture the extent to which the population has changed. If we unpack the heavy notation, we want to measure the minutest change in the population of rabbits. A time smaller than a zeptosecond  (i.e.,  one trillionth of a billionth of a second). If we suppose that the growth rate $r$ is 0.01 new rabbits per week for every current rabbit population $N$. This means when $N$ is 1000, the rate of change $\frac{dN}{dt}$ is then $1000 \times 0.01 = 10$ new rabbits per week. However, the drawback to our formulation is it is true for only that population instance and doesn't account for the change that is happening continuously. But one lesson we can learn is the bigger the population, the more new rabbits there can be! This implies if the population is 2000 we get $2000\times0.01 = 20$ new rabbits per week and so on. So a more rigorous formulation of our rabbit population model would be as follows:
</p>

$$
\begin{equation}
     \frac{dN}{dt} = rN.
     \label{rabit_fin}
\end{equation}
$$

<p style="text-align:justify;">
PDE models are used together with specific boundary conditions and initial conditions to best describe the system's behavior. These PDEs such as the Navier-Stokes equations are useful in many aspects to study the dynamical behavior of many physical phenomena such as the movement of fluids that is most discussed in fluid dynamics, a key component of climate physics. On the other hand, Ordinary differential equations such as:
</p>

$$
  \begin{itemize}
      \item Lorenz's equations are used in examination of complicated problems and examining the butterfly effects.
      \item The Lotka-Volt-era equations that are very much useful in the examination of the prey-predator behavior which is a an important concept for co-existence.
      \item Differential equation such the Susceptible Infected Recovered (SIR)-, Susceptible Exposed Infected Recovered (SEIR)- models that are used in the dynamical modelling of diseases, such as Covid-$19$ are important in vaccine development and prediction of the disease spread.
      \item For mechanical engineering, the concept of ODEs is dominant in modelling motion such as oscillations of a swinging pendulum drawing from damped to un-damped oscillations.
  \end{itemize}
$$

<p style="text-align:justify;">
These and many other examples of differential equations, both ODEs and PDEs are proving to be useful to computer scientist, physicists, climate scientists and many other scientists that contribute to the study of dynamical behaviors of all physical aspects on this planet.
</p>
This proves the reason for the use of differential equations.

References
======
