---
title: 'Earthlings'
date: 2021-09-20
permalink: /posts/2021/09/blog-post-1/
author: Yusuf Brima
tags:
  - Short Stories
  - Fiction
  - Human Evolution
---
<p class="page__date"><strong>
  <i class="fa fa-fw fa-user" aria-hidden="true"></i> Author:</strong>
  Yusuf Brima
</p>

Earthlings
======
A long time ago on our home planet, stardusts -- predecessors of modern humans reached a golden age when we thrived and flourish with advanced art, medicine, science, philosophy, and technology. We unraveled the mysteries of DNA, advanced synthetic biology, tapped into the inner workings of the atom, colonized constellations, build castles and monuments of unfathomable magnitude. We unlocked the hidden forces of the universe through AI. We broke the known laws of physics and built faster than light stargates for interstellar travels. We created paradise on our home planet. Death, hunger, diseases vanquished from the surface of our planet. We became a hive mind of intelligence. This flourishing period brought a remarkable steady-state equilibrium of peace and unity on the face of the planet. The hive mind of collective intelligence ruled through an egalitarian way as we had solved the age-old problem of coordination and value alignments for a conscious society.
Our reality became espoused with virtual worlds. The two became indistinguishable and the latter allowed self-expression to the highest potential. The potentialities were infinite. Hominoids, as we became known, transcended the limits of our five senses, we became so obsessed and possessed by our technological prowess and summoned higher dimensions that could be perceived by our advanced percepts.

But this was not meant to last, we became too powerful, but the human instinct of thirty for power was never quenched. So the great reckoning came when a small but very advanced Hominoids known as the seers disrupted the delicate balance of power and broke free from the collective intelligence. They became the new ruling elites. Their era ushered a wave of rebellion by the resistance, a devoted band of techies who were bent on fixing the problem posed by the seers. This led to the great war, that was immortalized into the annals of our history. The history was ingrained in the DNA that is in every one of us - - we the descendant of the bygone era of great civilizations. That is the covenant we made with the resistance when they shipped us from our home planet called Origins, which was in the Alpha Centauri star system, to our new settle we now call earth. We arrived on this planet 2.5 billion years ago as germinoids, advanced embryonic fetuses to populate our new home planet. Our home star system got annihilated in the epic battle that sealed the fate of the seers and the resistance. 
We have thrived and blossom as the earth eerily resembles our home and life here for us became possible. So we live happily ever after.
