---
title: "Sampe documents and general instructions for scholarship application"
collection: talks
type: "Mentorship"
permalink: /mentorship/2022-05-08
venue: "Online"
date: 2022-05-08
location: "Anywhere on Earth (AoE)"
---
<p style='text-align:justify;'>
As mentioned in my previous <a href="https://yusufbrima.github.io/mentorship/2022-03-18">post</a>, scholarships are offered to candidiate base on <b>specific eligibility criteria</b> which could range from <b>merit (whatever its definition might be) to diversity and inclusion of underrepresented groups</b>. However, the common denominator is, these candidates need <b>financial assistance</b> for professional development.
</p>
<p style='text-align:justify;'>
One key advice which you should bear in mind in your hunt for scholarship opportunities is to avoid plagiarism. I know, we all at one point in time have to stand on the shoulders of giants in order to grow but give credit to whom it is due. Intellectual honesty is very important. You may wonder, why am I taking a tangent and being stoic on this subject?! Simple. Primarily because it is very crucial not only in getting a scholarship but to toward your profession success (or failure) altogether. Pay attention to this truism. You are going to get suggestively tempted to not be original but doing so could be at your detriment. So avoid using other people's motivation letters, study plan or similar documents as your own. Be yourself. Tell your own unique story. That will help you stand out.
</P>
<p style='text-align:justify;'>
Having got that out of the way, here are a few sample documents and templates to help <b> inspire </b> you develop your own application portfolio. This is not exhaustive, neither it is the best there exist. However, it could be a great first step in developing an intuition of how these documents are developed.
</P>
<p style='text-align:justify;'>
<a href="http://yusufbrima.github.io/files/Motivation_Letter_Template.pdf"> Motivation Letter Template </a> <br />
<a href="http://yusufbrima.github.io/files/Study_Plan_Bangladesh.pdf"> Study Plan Sample </a> <br />
<a href="http://yusufbrima.github.io/files/research_proposal.pdf">Research Proposal Sample (disclaimer: it's Computer Science-based but the ideas and structure should translate easily to other STEM-based disciplines maybe even beyond)</a> <br />
</P>
<p style='text-align:justify;'>
This page is a work-in-progress and will continue to be expanded upon to aid more smooth application process for potential candidates.
</P>